(Please, read file iio.h if you want to use the library.
The present file contains only boring philosophical discussion.)




*************************
DEFINITION AND PRINCIPLES
*************************


An image is a multidimensional array of numbers.  A small image is an
image that fits comfortably in memory.  There are hundreds of file
formats for storing images.  IIO is a library for reading small
images from files, regardless of their format.  It is written in C,
and it is intended to be used in C programs.  The goals of this
library, in decreasing order of importance, are the following:


1. Be written in standard C

All the code must be standard ANSI/ISO C (namely, the current
standard as of November 2010, which is named "ISO/IEC 9899:1999
Technical Corrigendum 2004", commonly known as C99).  Whenever
non-language constructs such as POSIX extensions are used, they must
be hidden behind appropriate #ifdef macros and a pure C alternative
must be available.  Currently, the only POSIX extension is the
"fmemopen" function, for which an alternative implementation is
provided (based on writing a temporary file).


2. Have a nice and clean API

This library is intended to be used in tiny parts of larger programs,
without disturbing the work flow of the main program.  The data
provided by the library must be usable directly by the programmer in
the way which she decides, not in any way imposed by the library.  An
image is just an array of numbers, and this is what the
"iio_read_image" function returns.  In particular, the API does not
use structs to communicate with the user.  The functions of the API
all look like this (with slight variations, to allow different data
types for numbers, and different dimensions and number of channels):

	float *iio_read_image_float(char *filename, int *width, int *height);
	float *x = iio_read_image_float("/dev/stdin", &w, &h);
	x[i+j*w] = ...;

Needless to say, the library uses no monstrosities such as "init"
functions.



3. Have a nice and clean code

Every function fits into a 80x25 screen, with K&R bracing style and 8
spaces per tab.  The names of functions are long and descriptive,
without abbreviations.  There are no global nor static variables, and
local variables have very short names (usually, a single letter).
All identifiers are lowercase, with underscores to separate different
words.  The code compiles without warnings, with all warnings enabled
on all known C compilers.



4. Be trivial to compile, to use and to port

An acceptable way of using the library is to copy the code of the
desired function into your program.  In fact, this is the preferred
way.  The set of dependences (such as libpng, libjpeg) is small, but
not empty.  However, any dependency can be disabled by changing a
single line on "iio.h".  In execution time, if there is no available
external library to read a given image, then IIO will fall back to
some desperate hacks, such as writing the file to disc and calling an
external conversion program.


5. Open all image file formats.

If there is an image file which can not be read, this is a bug and it
must be solved.




OLD NOTE: the word "small" on the beginning of this document means
that the whole image data must fit in memory.  There are no
provisions for memory-mapped files, virtual crops, multi-scale
access, or other fancy methods needed to deal with large images or
real videos.  These interesting features must be the goal of a very
different library, because I do not know a way to provide this
functionality without uglifying the API.



***********************
IMAGES ACCORDING TO IIO
***********************

Mathematically, an image is a function

	f:R^d -> R^p.		(1)

The number "d" is called the "dimension" of the image, and the number
"p" may be called the "depth", the "pixel dimension" or the "number
of channels", depending on context.  Typically, d=2 or 3, and p=1 or
3.  A digital image is an approximation of a mathematical image, in a
very precise sense.  Since R is an infinite set, we are forced to take
appropriate finite subsets of R.  Now, R appears two times on
formula (1).  The process of taking a finite subset of the first R is
called "sampling" or "discretization".  The process of taking a
finite subset of the second R is called "quantization".

In IIO, discretization consists always in taking points of R^d with
non-negative consecutive integer coordinates starting from zero.
Thus, R^d is discretized as a product of d intervals of possibly
different length.  If we denote by [n] the set {0, 1, 2, ..., n-1},
then the discretization turns R^d into the finite set [s_0] x [s_1] x
... x [s_{n-1}].  The numbers s_i are called the "sizes" of the
image, and they specify completely the discretization of the digital
image.  The quantization of R^p is done by expressing each of the "p"
numbers, called "samples" using one of the numeric types of the C
language.  There are the following 12 options available for samples:

	int8_t, integers between -128 and 127
	uint8_t, integers between 0 and 255
	int16_t, ...
	uint16_t
	int32_t
	uint32_t
	int64_t
	uint64_t
	half, IEEE floats of 16 bits
	float, IEEE floats of 32 bits
	double, IEEE floats of 64 bits
	long double, IEEE floats of 96 bits

as a convenience, the sample types "char", "short", "int" and "long"
are also available, in their signed and unsigned versions, with
whatever standard meaning they have in each platform (however, their
use is not necessarily portable when sharing data between platforms).

The pair (d,p) is called the "signature" of the image.  Some examples
of numeric data that can be encoded as images of different
signatures:

	d  p  interpretation
	---------------------------------
	1  1  mono sound
	1  2  stereo sound, plane curve
	1  3  spatial curve
	2  1  gray image
	2  2  vector field
	2  3  color image, parametrized surface
	3  1  gray video/medical image
	3  3  color video
	3  9  tensor-valued medical image

After discretization and quantization, the signatures can be
rewritten as "(s_0, ..., s_d ; p type)".  For example:

	signature
	---------------------------------------
	(256,256; 1 char)       low-resolution gray-scale image
	(256,256; 3 char)       low-resolution color image
	(2048,2048; 1 char)     high-resolution gray-scale image
	(2048,2048; 1 float)    high-resolution floating point gray-scale image
	(2048,2048; 30 char)    high-resolution multi-spectral image
	(128,128,128; 1 short)  low-resolution medical image of 16 bits
	(512,512,512; 1 char)   high-resolution medical image of 8 bits
	(320,200,250; 1 char)	ten seconds of low quality black and white video
	(700,500,50; 3 char)	one second of med-def color video

Observation: (a,b; c type) has exactly the same data as (a,b,c; 1 type)


Thus, an IIO image is defined in the following way (this struct is
imaginary, as the IIO library does not use structs):

	// an image R^d -> R^p
	struct iio_image {
		int dimension;                // d
		int sizes[IIO_MAX_DIMENSION]; // s[0], ... , s[d-1]
		int pixel_dimension;          // p
		int integer_size;             // 0, 1, 2, 4 or 8
		int float_size;               // 0, 2, 4, 8, 12 or 16
		bool signedness;              // true or false
		void *data;                   // pointer to samples
	}

The number of samples of an image x is

	x.sizes[0] * ... * x.sizes[x.dimension-1] * x.pixel_dimension

and the total size of the memory block pointed by x->data is the
number of samples times (x->integer_size + x->float_size).


***********
CONVERSIONS
***********

The IIO library does not do image processing.  Its only task is to
give to the user the numbers found inside image files.  However, the
user may ask for the numbers in 8-bits, even when the input image has
floating point values.  Thus, some data conversion is necessary.
There are two cases: lossless conversion and lossy data conversion.
Lossless conversion is done silently.  Lossy compression is done as
nicely as possible, but then a warning message is printed to stderr.
First we treat the conversion of samples, which is clear and nice.
Later we treat the conversion of pixels (which may have multiple
samples), which is tricky and artificial.  Finally, we treat
conversion of signatures, which is called transposition or
interlacing, depending on the context.

* Lossless conversions of samples:

	- From unsigned integer to unsigned integer of larger size
	- From signed integer to signed integer of larger size
	- From floating point to floating point of larger size
	- From signed or unsigned integer of 8 or 16 bits to float
	- From signed or unsigned integer of 8, 16 or 32 bits to double

* Slightly lossy conversions of samples:

* Lossy conversions:

	- the rest of them

...



**************
ERROR HANDLING
**************

There are many legitimate situations in which the library can not
read an image as requested: either because the provided filename does
not exist, because it has an incorrect format, because there is not
enough memory to store the numbers, whatever.  There are three
possible strategies for dealing with errors:

	1. Abort the caller program when any error is encountered
	2. Return NULL when any error is encountered
	3. Return NULL and set a global variable indicating the cause

The behaviour of IIO can be set on compilation time using the macros
IIO_ABORT_ON_ERROR and IIO_SET_ERROR_CAUSE.  The advantage of the
first case is that the functions always return valid data.  The other
two approaches require some amount of error checking code in the
caller program, which is probably tedious to write in some
applications.  It is up to the user of the library to decide which
kind of error recovery to do.  The default is number (2).



****************
DESIGN TRADEOFFS
****************

1. API conventions.
-------------------

There is a choice between the following two kinds of API:

a) Return type specified as argument:

	#define FORMAT_FLOAT 1
	#define FORMAT_CHAR 2
	void *read_stuff(char *filename, int desired_format);

b) Return type determined by function name:

	float *read_floats(char *filename);
	char *read_chars(char *filename);

Although the differences are small and purely stylistic, a firm
decision was taken towards the second option.  The reasons for
choosing "b)" are the following:

* no macros or constants in the API
* locality: the declaration of any function is enough to understand it
* no need to cast anything

There are, however, disadvantages with respect to the advantages of
"a)", which were disregarded:

* only one function in the API
* easier to extend with new formats using the same API
* more comfortable when the list of formats is a cartesian product of
  options (e.g.: using bitmasks for the desired format)


2. Pixel slicing
----------------

The order of "channels" inside a pixel, RGB BGR RGBA ARGB, does not
matter.  This ordering is ignored and kept as it was found inside the
input file.  There is a mechanism for querying which order it was
stored.  It is up to the user of the library to apply the desired
conversions if this order is not satisfactory.

Another issue is slicing these "channels", by scattering the
components of each pixel along the input file.  This is an
unacceptable act of violence which is not supported by this library.
It is braindead, inefficient, and makes no sense at all.  It is akin
to listing the names and surnames of the students in a class in
different sheets of paper.  A pixel is an atom of information which
must never be divided at a higher level.


3. ...
------





**************
WRITING IMAGES
**************

Although the main concern of IIO is to READ images, the library
provides some convenience functions for writing images.  This is a
secondary afterthought, and there is no intention to support a
complete set of formats.  Specifically, lossy compression is not
implemented.



*************
DOCUMENTATION
*************

The only necessary documentation is the file "iio.h"



********
TUTORIAL
********

cat > try_iio.c
#include <stdlib.h> // for free
#include "iio.h"
int main()
{
	int w, h;
	float *x = iio_read_image_floats("image.jpg", &w, &h);
	x[0+w*0] = 0;
	iio_write_foats_to_image("image_with_first_pixel_black.png", x, w, h);
        free(x);
        return 0;
}
^D
c99 try_iio.c iio.c -ljpeg
./a.out


*********
COMPILERS
*********

for CC in gcc icc suncc tcc pcc lcc clang; do
	$CC -c iio.c
done




*********
LICENCING
*********

I do not believe in licences: they hold no meaning to me.  I do not
like them either: they are boilerplate noise added at the beginning
of otherwise perfectly clean files.  If, for whatever reason, you
need a licenced version of this software, ask me which kind of
licence do you want, and I will stick it to the code and send you the
resulting dirty files.




********
SEE ALSO
********

* stb_image.c by Sean Barrett
* io_png.c and io_tiff.c by Nicolas Limare
* imageio.c by Pascal Getreuer



*******
CREDITS
*******

Author: Enric Meinhardt-Llopis

I am the only one to blame for the code itself.

I took from ImageMagick the idea of reading arbitrary images from
pipes, but this idea was probably well-known folklore.

I took from Nicolas Limare's "png_io.h" the idea of returning an
image into a free-able block, but this idea was probably well-known
folklore.

I had the idea of returning a free-able double pointer, but this idea
was probably well-known folklore.




vim:set tw=69:
